samprāpto mathurāṃ dinārdhavigame tatrāntarasmin vasa-
nnārāme vihitāśana: sakhijanairyāta: purīmīkṣitum |
prāpo rājapathaṃ ciraśrutidhṛtavyālokakautūhala-
strīpuṃsodyadagaṇyapuṇyanigalairākṛṣyamāṇo nu kim ||1||
samprāpta: mathurāṃ	reaching Mathura
dina-ardha-vigame	at the day's half end (noon)
tatra-antarasmin	there, just outside (the city)
vasan-ārāme	halting in a garden
vihita-āśana:	having finished eating food
sakhi-janai:-yāta:	with friend folks (Thou) went to
purīm-īkṣitum	the city to see (around)
prāpa: rājapathaṃ	(Thou) reached the main road
cira-śruti-dhṛta-	for long hearing (about Thee, and so) holding
vyāloka-kautūhala-	to see (Thee) the eagerness
strī-puṃsa-	women and men
udyat-agaṇya-puṇya-nigalai:-	(whose) arising innumerable merits (in a) chain (like)
ākṛṣyamāṇa:	drawn (towards them)
nu kim	as if
Thou reached Mathura by noon. Having taken Thy lunch in a garden on the outskirts of Mathura, Thou proceeded to see the city with Thy friends, and reached the main road. Thou were drawn as though by a chain formed by the meritorious people of Mathura who had long heard about Thee and were very eager to see Thee in person.
tvatpādadyutivat sarāgasubhagā: tvanmūrtivadyoṣita:
samprāptā vilasatpayodhararuco lolā bhavat dṛṣṭivat |
hāriṇyastvadura:sthalīvadayi te mandasmitaprauḍhiva-
nnairmalyollasitā: kacaugharucivadrājatkalāpāśritā: ||2||
tvat-pād-dyutivat	Thy feet glow like
sarāga-subhagā:	1)with reddish tinge beautiful 2)with intense love, radiant
tvat-mūrtivat-yoṣita:	Thy form like, the women
samprāptā:	assembled
vilasat-payodhara-ruca:	1) sporting the rain bearing cloud lustre 2)having breasts beautiful
lolā	1) moving about 2) desirous (of seeing Thee)
bhavat-dṛṣṭivat	Thy eyes like
hāriṇya:	1) wearing necklaces 2) attractive
tvat-ura:sthalīvat-	Thy chest area like
ayi te	O Thou! Thy
mand-smita-prauḍhivat	mild smile's majesty like
nairmalya-ullasitā:	(because of) purity, shining
kacaugha-rucivat-	(Thy) cluster of hair beauty like
rājat-kalāpa-āśritā:	1) adorned by peacock feather stuck in them 2) adorned by ornaments wearing
The women who came to see Thee were similar to Thee in various respects - Thy feet glow with a reddish tinge, they were radiant and glowed with the intense love for Thee. Thou have a lustre of rain bearing clouds, they had beautiful full breasts. Thy eyes always moved about, they had eyes which were always desirous to see Thee. Thy chest is attractive with many necklaces, they were also attractive.Thy mild smile has a majesty of innocence, they had a majesty and they shined due to their purity. Thy cluster of black hair is adorned by a peacock feather stuck in it, their tresses were adorned by wearing ornaments.
tāsāmākalayannapāṅgavalanairmodaṃ praharṣādbhuta-
vyāloleṣu janeṣu tatra rajakaṃ kañcit paṭīṃ prārthayan |
kaste dāsyati rājakīyavasanaṃ yāhīti tenodita:
sadyastasya kareṇa śīrṣamahṛthā: so'pyāpa puṇyāṃ gatim ||3||
tāsām-ākalayan-	to them (the women) causing
apāṅga-valanai:-	by sidelong glances
modaṃ	extreme delight
praharṣa-adbhuta-vyāloleṣu	(when) with joy and wonder swaying
janeṣu tatra	the people were there
rajakaṃ kañcit	a washerman some
paṭīṃ prārthayan	garments (Thou) asking for
ka:-te dāsyati	who to you is going to give
rājakīya-vasanaṃ	royal robes
yāhi-iti	go away', thus
tena-udita:	by him being said
sadya:-tasya	at once his (head)
kareṇa śīrṣam-ahṛthā:	by hand head (Thou) cut off
sa:-api-āpa	he also attained
puṇyāṃ gatiṃ	salvation
Thy sidelong glances gave intense joy to the women and swayed the populace with joy and wonder. There among the people, Thou asked a washerman for clothes to which he retorted saying 'who is going to give you royal robes, go away.' Thou at once cut off his head with Thy hand, whereby he attained salvation.
bhūyo vāyakamekamāyatamatiṃ toṣeṇa veṣocitaṃ
dāśvāṃsaṃ svapadaṃ ninetha sukṛtaṃ ko veda jīvātmanām |
mālābhi: stabakai: stavairapi punarmālākṛtā mānito
bhaktiṃ tena vṛtāṃ dideśitha parāṃ lakṣmīṃ ca lakṣmīpate ||4||
bhūya:	then thereafter
vāyakam-ekam-	weaver, one
āyata-matiṃ	(who was) broad minded
toṣeṇa veṣa-ucitaṃ	with satisfaction, dress suitable
dāśvāṃsaṃ svapadaṃ	gave, (him to) Thy abode
ninetha sukṛtaṃ	(Thou) did lead, merits
ka: veda	who can fathom
jīvātmanām	of embodied souls
mālābhi: stabakai:	with garlands and bouquets
stavai:-api	and hymns of praise also
puna:-mālākṛtā	again by a garland maker
mānita: bhaktiṃ	honoured, Bhakti
tena vṛtāṃ	by him desired
dideśitha	(Thou) gave
parāṃ lakṣmīṃ ca	and immense wealth also
lakṣmīpate	O Lord of Laxmi!
One broad minded weaver gave to Thee suitable clothes and Thou conferred salvation to him. Who other than Thou can fathom the merits of the jivas. O Lord of Laxmi! Again a garland maker who gave Thee garlands and bouquets and also sung hymns of praises was given Bhakti as desired by him, and also immense wealth.
kubjāmabjavilocanāṃ pathipunardṛṣṭvā'ṅgarāge tayā
datte sādhu kilāṅgarāgamadadāstasyā mahāntaṃ hṛdi |
cittasthāmṛjutāmatha prathayituṃ gātre'pi tasyā: sphuṭaṃ
gṛhṇan mañju kareṇa tāmudanayastāvajjagatsundarīm ||5||
kubjām-abja-vilocanām	to the hunched backed woman who was lotus eyed
pathi-puna:-dṛṣṭvā-	on the way, then, seeing
aṅgarāge tayā datte	and being given unguents by her
sādhu kila-	well indeed
aṅga	Dear Lord!
rāgam-adadā:-	love (thou) did give
tasyā: mahāntam	to her intense (love)
hṛdi cittasthām-	in heart, which was there in her mind (also)
ṛjutām-atha	that s traightness then
prathayituṃ gātre-api	to manifest in the body also
tasyā: sphuṭaṃ gṛhṇan	for her clearly holding
mañju kareṇa	with (Thy) beautiful hand
tām-udanaya:-tāvat-	uplifted her , then
jagat-sundarīm	to the most beautiful woman
On the way Thou saw a beautiful woman with lotus eyes but with a hunch back. She presented to Thee sandal paste and other unguents and in return Thou created in her heart an intense love for Thee. Then, in order that her straight forward inner mind be reflected in her outer physical appearance also, Thou gave a gentle pull holding her chin by Thy beautiful hand and thus transformed her into one of the most beautiful women in the world.
tāvanniścitavaibhavāstava vibho nātyantapāpā janā
yatkiñciddadate sma śaktyanuguṇaṃ tāmbūlamālyādikam |
gṛhṇāna: kusumādi kiñcana tadā mārge nibaddhāñjali-
rnātiṣṭhaṃ bata hā yato'dya vipulāmārtiṃ vrajāmi prabho ||6||
tāvat	then
niścita-vaibhavā:-tava	those who had acquired full faith in Thy greatness
vibho	O Lord!
na-atyanta-pāpā-janā	and who were not very sinful
yat-kiñcit-dadate-sma	something or the other were giving (to Thee)
śakti-anuguṇaṃ	according to their capacity
tāmbūla-mālya-ādikam	betel, garlands etc.,
gṛhṇāna: kusuma-ādi	carrying flowers etc
kiñcana tadā mārge	some, at that time, in the path
nibaddha-añjali:	with joined palms (in salutation)
na-atiṣṭhaṃ	did not stand (I)
bata hā yata:-adya	because of which today
vipulām-ārtim	great sorrow
vrajāmi prabho	I am experiencing O Lord!
O Lord! Then those who were not very sinful and so had acquired full faith in Thy greatness, offered to Thee something or the other according to their capacity, like betel, garlands etc., At that time, in the path, carrying some flowers, alas, I did not stand with joined palms in salutation, because of which, today, I am experiencing great sorrow.
eṣyāmīti vimuktayā'pi bhagavannālepadātryā tayā
dūrāt kātarayā nirīkṣitagatistvaṃ prāviśo gopuram |
āghoṣānumitatvadāgamamahāharṣollaladdevakī-
vakṣojapragalatpayorasamiṣāttvatkīrtirantargatā ||7||
eṣyāmi-iti	I shall come thus
vimuktayā-api	though sent away
bhagavan-	O Lord!
ālepadātryā	(by her) who gave Thee unguents
tayā dūrāt	by her from far
kātarayā	disdainfully
nirīkṣita-gati:-tvam	watching going Thee
prāviśa: gopuram	entered the main gate of the city
āghoṣa-anumita-	from jubilation inferred
tvat-āgama-	Thy coming
mahā-harṣa-ullalat-	the great joy stimulating
devakī-vakṣoja-	from Devaki's breasts
pragalat-payorasa-	flowing milk
miṣāt-	in the guise of
tvat-kīrti:-	Thy fame
anta:gatā	went in (the city)
I will come again', saying so Thou dispersed the woman who had given unguents to Thee, whose gaze followed Thee till as far as Thou could be seen, going away. Then Thou prepared to enter the outer gate of the city (Mathura). Thy coming was preceded by Thy fame which was like Devaki's (Krishna's mother) breast milk stimulated by the jubilation of Thy arrival.
āviṣṭo nagarīṃ mahotsavavatīṃ kodaṇḍaśālāṃ vrajan
mādhuryeṇa nu tejasā nu puruṣairdūreṇa dattāntara: |
sragbhirbhūṣitamarcitaṃ varadhanurmā meti vādāt pura:
prāgṛhṇā: samaropaya: kila samākrākṣīrabhāṅkṣīrapi ||8||
āviṣṭa:	(Thou) having entered
nagarīṃ mahotsavavatīṃ	the city ready for the festival
kodaṇḍaśālāṃ vrajan	to the hall of the great bow going
mādhuryeṇa nu	whether by charm
tejasā nu	or by Thy majesty,
puruṣai:-dūreṇa	by the guards, standing at a distance
dattāntara:	and allowing Thee to enter,
sragbhi:-bhūṣitam-	with garlands adorned
arcitaṃ vara-dhanu:-	and worshipped the great bow
mā mā-iti	do not do not thus
vādāt pura:	saying, before (that),
prāgṛhṇā:	taking hold of and lifting
samaropaya: kila	strung it, indeed
samākrākṣī:-	and drew it
abhāṅkṣī:-api	and broke it also
Having entered the festive city Thou proceeded to the hall of the great bow. Charmed by Thy majesty, the people stood at a distance and the guards too gave way to Thee to enter. The great bow lay there decorated with flower garlands and worshipped. Before the guards or the caretakers admonished Thee saying 'No no" Thou took hold of the bow, lifted it up, strung it, drew it and also broke it.
śva: kaṃsakṣapaṇotsavasya purata: prārambhatūryopama-
ścāpadhvaṃsamahādhvanistava vibho devānaromāñcayat |
kaṃsasyāpi ca vepathustadudita: kodaṇḍakhaṇḍadvayī-
caṇḍābhyāhatarakṣipūruṣaravairutkūlito'bhūt tvayā ||9||
śva:	tomorrow
kaṃsa-kṣapaṇa-utsavasya	of the Kansa's slaying festival's
purata: prārambha-tūrya-upama:-	before, beginning with the initial drum beat like
cāpa-dhvaṃsa-mahā-dhvani:-	the bow's breaking terrific sound
tava vibho	by Thee O Lord!
devān-aromāñcayat	in the gods' produced horripilation
kaṃsasya-api ca	and of Kansa also
vepathu:-tat-udita:	trembling from that arose
kodaṇḍa-khaṇḍa-dvayī-	with the bow's two pieces
caṇḍa-abhyāhata-	severely beaten
rakṣi-pūruṣa-ravai:-	the guard's cries
utkūlita:-abhūt	(the sound) was made to overflow (or increased manifold)
tvayā	by Thee
The breaking of the bow with a terrific sound was like the heralding drum beat to the festival of Kansa's destruction due the next day. O Lord! The sound caused horripilation in the gods. Even Kansa trembled by the sound which increased many fold and overflowed by the shrieks of the guards who were severely beaten by Thee with the two pieces of the bow.
śiṣṭairduṣṭajanaiśca dṛṣṭamahimā prītyā ca bhītyā tata:
sampaśyan purasampadaṃ pravicaran sāyaṃ gato vāṭikām |
śrīdāmnā saha rādhikāvirahajaṃ khedaṃ vadan prasvapa-
nnānandannavatārakāryaghaṭanādvāteśa saṃrakṣa mām ||10||
śiṣṭai:-	by the good people
duṣṭa-janai:-ca	and by the wicked people
dṛṣṭa-mahimā	was realised the greatness
prītyā ca bhītyā	with love and with fear
tata: sampaśyan	then seeing
pura-sampadaṃ pravicaran	the city's prosperity, moving about
sāyaṃ gata: vāṭikām	in the evening went to the garden
śrīdāmnā saha	with Shreedaamaa
rādhikā-virahjaṃ khedaṃ	Raadhaa's separation causing sorrow
vadan prasvapan-	talking about and then sleeping
ānandan-	and feeling happy
avatāra-kārya-ghaṭanāt-	at the impending fulfilment of the purpose of Thy incarnation
vāteśa saṃrakṣa mām	O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me
Thy greatness was realised by the good people with love and by the wicked people with fear. Thou moved about the city viewing its prosperity and returned to Thy camp in the garden in the evening. Thou talked to Shreedaamaa about Thy sorrow because of the separation from Raadhaa. Thou then went to sleep feeling content and happy at the impending fulfilment of the purpose of Thy incarnation. O Lord of Guruvaayur! deign to protect me.